(upbeat music)
(keyboard clicking)
All right, so now let's take a look at arrays.
As I've mentioned before, there isn't a special
array type in Kotlin.
Arrays are a class like any other,
and the class is called, array.
In fact, the array class is a collections class.
So we're going to start by creating an array of strings
and I'm going to just shut the console for a minute
and I'm going to delete all of the code in here
so that we're starting with a clean slate.
So there are two ways we can create an array class.
If you know the elements you want in the array in advance,
the easiest way to do it is to use the arrayOf function.
So we can say val names equals arrayOf,
and then we can just go ahead and put our names in here.
So, I'll put in John, Jane, Jill and let's put one more in.
Joe.
I should have called this an array
of names that start with J.
Joe.
There we go.
Now, notice that we don't have to specify the type.
The compiler can see that we're initialising
the array with strings.
So if you wanted an array of longs,
you'd either have to include the L suffix for all
the numbers what you have to specify the type.
So, if we wanted to do that, we could do val longs1
equals arrayOf 1L, 2L, 3L.
And that works.
Or, we could say val longs2 equals arrayOf.
And now, we wanna tell the compiler
that we actually want longs.
And then we can say, one, two, three, four.
And that does the same thing.
And notice that this is just a usual, generics syntax
because an array is actually, as I just mentioned
is actually a collection.
Now, if we didn't specify a long here,
we actually get an int array.
So let's try that.
So let's say, longs3 equals arrayOf.
And we'll do the same thing.
And let's print line, longs2 is an array of Long.
And we'll do print line longs3 is array of Long.
We don't even have to print it, 'cause the compiler's
gonna tell us right away, no.
No, it's not an array of Long.
Sorry.
So, we'll check that it's an array of Int.
So, when you're doing things like this, you'll even know it
when you write it in, what the answer is gonna be.
So, we'll see true in both cases.
So, in the first case where we told compiler
we wanted an arrayOf longs, we got an array of Long
and in the second case where we didn't tell the compiler
what type we wanted, and we didn't include the L suffix
here, the compiler looked at this and said, you want int.
And just to show that the first one also gives us a long,
I'll print it out for completeness.
Is array of Long.
The editor's not complaining here, so we pretty much know
that we're gonna get a true.
And we do.
Now, even though this is a collection as I mentioned
when we were going over some lightning quick differences,
with collections you can use array indexing
to get to the element.
So, you can use the usual array indexing.
So, we can go print line, longs1.
And let's print the second element,
and we should get three.
And we do.
So, you can go ahead and just use the usual
array indexing with them.
Now, you can also use the array constructor.
Remember, that because array is a class is going to have
constructors and you can use the array constructor
and pass a lambda expression to initialise the array.
For example if you wanted to initialise an array
with even numbers between zero and 30 inclusive,
you could do the following.
You could say, val evenNumbers equals Array,
and we wanted array of 16 elements.
So, we're telling the compiler here that this
is the length of the array.
And then following that in curly braces,
we write our lambda expression.
And in this case, we want i, i times two.
So, what are we doing here?
We're saying that we want 16 elements and for each element
take the index and multiple fight by two
and that's the value that we want stored for that index.
So for example, for zero we would store zero.
So array, the even-numbered zero is gonna get zero.
For the first element, which will have index one
or rather the second element, which will have index one
we're going to store the number two.
Because one times two is two.
For the third element that has index two,
we're gonna store two times two, which is four.
So, can you see the pattern.
Zero, two, four, et cetera, all the way up to 30
because we only have 16 elements.
So, let's print out the array to verify that
that's what we're going to get.
So, we'll say for number and evenNumbers,
and we want to print line number.
Now we're gonna go over the for loop in much
more detail later, but basically we're saying
this is looping through the array and each time
it's an element, the assigns it to number.
So the first iteration, number will get even-number zero.
The second iteration, number will get
even-numbers one, et cetera.
So, let's print this out.
And we'll see that starting here,
at this zero we have zero, two, four, six, eight
all the way up to 30.
And so, in a very concise statement
we're able to initialising an array.
And lambda expressions, to initialise the array are good
when you have patterns like that.
Logical sequences that you want to
initialise the array with.
For example, you know, if you wanted to initialise
an array with all the numbers from one to 100,000
instead of having to write a loop, in looping through one
100,000 times, as I mentioned previously
the original for loop isn't even available in Kotlin.
You can do it with a lambda.
So, if you wanted to do that, we do the following.
Val, let's call it lotsOfNumbers equals Array.
And we're gonna make an array of 100,000 here.
And we'll say i.
And that's really all.
We could just go like this and that's going
to initialise our array of numbers.
That would actually be from zero to, I guess, 999,999.
So, you'd probably want to plus one here,
if you wanted one to 100,000.
And so, this would initialise an array of 100,000
with the numbers one to 100,000.
If we wanted to initialise an array with all zeros,
we could do this.
Val, allZeroes equals Array.
And let's make it an Array of 100.
And we can go i, and we want it all zeros.
In fact, there's a shorter way to write this.
In this case, we can just say, zero.
We can take away the index and just say, you know what,
for every element we want to initialise it to zero.
So, you can see how handy this is.
It makes for some very concise coding.
Okay, so this is all great if you know what you want
to initialise the array with.
But, what if you don't know what you want
to initialise their way with?
You want to declare an array, and then you want
to initialise it later.
That's not a problem.
But of course, in that case the compiler
won't be able to infer the type.
You'll notice, we've been using type inference
for our arrays.
We're not declaring expected type here, because the compiler
can figure it out from the initial value.
If you're not going to initialise the array
at declaration time, then you'll have to explicitly tell
the compiler the type.
Now, you could use the val keyword if you're just going
to assign the array, once.
Because don't forget, the variable will contain
a reference to the array.
It's okay to change the array contents themselves.
I'm going to declare the variable as var here,
'cause I makes the going to assign it twice
with two different instances.
So I'm gonna say, var, someArray.
And I'm going to make this an Array of Int.
So, because I'm not initialising the array
at declaration time, I have to explicitly tell the compiler
what type I want and then after that,
let's pretend I'm getting this data from somewhere else.
I'm gonna say, someArray equals arrayOf
one, two, three, four.
So far, so good.
And if you wanted to print the numbers in some array,
we could just say for number in someArray.
Print line number.
I'm just going to comment out this for loop
so that we don't get 30 prints.
Let's run.
And we'll see that we get our one, two, three, four.
I'll actually to get rid of this three as well,
'cause that can be confusing.
Now, because I declared the variable as var,
I can reassign it again and I can assign it later on
using the lambda expression that we saw.
I can say something like, I actually want someArray
to be Array of size six, let's say.
And I want to initialise each element of the array
with the following, i plus one, times 10.
So what I'm saying here, is I want to initialise
an array with 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60.
That's what I'm doing here.
And I'm gonna copy this, so we can print out the results
of this and see what we get.
And sure enough, we get 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60.
So, you can use this, the lambda expression
way of initialising arrays later on.
It doesn't have to be when you declare the variable.
We can actually mix datatypes in an array.
For example, we can create an array that contains
strings and ints and chars and big decimals, et cetera.
Let's give that a shot.
Now, if you're going to do this, you do something like val,
mixedArray equals, and arrayOf hello, that's at 22.
We'll add a BigDecimals number, 10.5
and let's throw in a char just for fun. (laughs)
Now, if you wanted to loop through this array,
you do it the same way that you do for any other array.
You'd say, for element.
And this can be anything in mixedArray.
And then, just print line the element.
Let's run that.
And we get our values printed.
So, as you can see, that's perfectly fine.
Okay, so I'm going to guess that mixedArray
is actually an array of Any.
I mean, that's the only way this is going to work, right.
That this has to be an array of Any.
It's like creating an array of object,
which is essentially what we're doing.
So, let's print line, mixedArray is an array of Any.
And we're not seeing an area here, so, I think we're fairly
safe in assuming we're gonna get true here.
And we do.
So, that's how you can create a mixedArray.
Okay, so remember when we asked the question
of how to call a Java method that wants
a primitive type as a parameter?
Well, we have a similar situation with arrays.
What do we do when the method wants an array?
So, let's add a method to the DummyClass
that has an int array parameter.
So, I'll open up DummyClass here,
and let's add another method.
Public.
We'll call this one void, and it'll just print numbers.
It'll print whatever it's passed.
So, we're gonna have it accept a primitive int array
as a parameter called, numbers.
And all it does, is loops through them
and prints them to the console.
And I need that pesky semicolon at the end of line here
'cause we're in Java.
So, nothing earth shattering here, but this wants
a primitive int array and as we know in Kotlin,
arrays are actually collections.
So, what do we do here?
So, back in our Kotlin code, how are we
gonna all this class?
Well, when we did it would primitives,
we were just able to do it.
We didn't have to do anything.
Like, when we wanted to call the, isVacationTime method,
we didn't have to do anything special.
When this was a lowercase B, we could just call it.
So, let's just try calling it.
Maybe we'll get lucky here.
So, we'll say val myIntArray equals arrayOf,
let's just give it a bunch of numbers.
And now, we're going to try calling the DummyClass.
So we'll go, DummyClass, dot and print numbers
and we'll pass our int array.
And we have a problem.
We have a type mismatch.
It says, required IntArray exclamation mark.
Don't worry about that now.
We'll be going over that later in the course,
and it's saying it found an array of Any
and that's because I screwed up (laughs)
and added .8 here.
Let me get rid of that, 'cause this should be an int array.
Okay, so now it's found an int array, which is what we want.
But there's a type mismatch.
So, unfortunately when it comes to arrays
we can't just call Java methods that want primitive arrays
without having to do anything special.
So, this is one case in Kotlin, where we do have to do
something differently when we wanna call something in Java.
So, if you know that you're going to want to call Java
with an array of primitive types, you should use
the array subclass for the primitive type.
So, when you want to call a Java method,
that wants a primitive array, you can't
just use the array class.
You have to use one of the special primitive
array classes in Kotlin.
There is int array, byte array, long array, char array.
You get the idea.
There's one for all of the corresponding
primitive types in Java.
Now, doing so is going to improve performance
when the Kotlin application runs, because these special
arrays that map to the primitive types are actually going
to be treated as primitive type arrays under the covers.
So, you actually get a performance boost by using them.
So, even if you're not going to call a Java method
that wants a primitive array, you can get a performance
boost by using these special primitive array classes
rather than just the general array class.
So, we're gonna change our code to use an int array
and all we have to do is call the intArrayOf function
instead of arrayOf.
So, all we have to do is come up here and change
this to intArrayOf and there goes our error.
It's gone away.
It's that simple.
Let's run now.
And here's the contents of our array,
printed from the Java method.
So, everything is working.
Everything's good again.
You can initialise the arrays that map
to primitive arrays in the usual way.
You can use a lambda.
You can use everything that we've looked at.
But there is one difference to be aware of.
Let's create an IntArray of size five,
but not initialise it.
So, will say val.
Yeah, val.
Actually we'll use var, because I might reassign it.
So, var, someOtherArray equals Array Int of size five.
Now you'll notice, we didn't do this before
we specified the size.
And that's because, we can't do it.
We get an error.
Now earlier, we declared an array variable as follows.
We did something like this.
Var, you know, array1.
And we just said, Array Int.
I'll just put a space in here.
Now, this works.
So, in this line were trying to do two things at once.
We're declaring their array and were also trying
to instantiate the array, 'cause we're saying we want
an array of size five.
We can't do that.
You'll see it says, no value pass for parameter init.
What we're actually doing here is trying to call
the array constructor.
And the array constructor wants two parameters.
It wants the size of the array and it wants
the list of values.
On this line, all we're doing is declaring the array.
We're not trying to instantiate it,
and that's why we don't get an error.
So, you can do this.
But you can't do this.
You can say at declaration time, I want to create an array
of size five, or at least you can't do it this way.
But, when it comes to the primitive type arrays,
you can do this sort of thing.
Let's try the same thing with an int array,
rather than an Array of int.
So, I'm going to take these out and I'm going to say var,
someOtherArray equals IntArray, five.
And that works.
You'll see we don't get any errors.
So, with these special primitive type arrays,
you can do this.
And the reason is, they're initialised automatically
with the default value for the primitive type.
So, in this case it will be initialising to all zeros
'cause it's integers and we can loop through
and print that out to confirm for number in someOtherArray.
We'll just print line the number and let's run.
And we'll see that we get five zeros printed here.
So, that's something to be aware of.
The primitive arrays will be initialised for you
if you don't provide any initial values.
But when you're dealing with the general
array class, that's not true, if you're trying
to instantiate the array and pass the size.
So, is there a way with the general array class
to instantiate the array, but not to initialise it up front?
So, let's say you know the maximum number of elements
that you're gonna want in the array,
but you don't know their values.
If the array constructor wants both the size and the values,
how can you create an empty array?
Well, there is an empty array function, but to be completely
honest with you, I'm not clear on the use case for it
because it really is an empty array.
You can't assign anything to it.
So, that's probably not what you want.
I've seen developers asking online,
what the point of the empty array function is
and nobody ever seems to have a good answer for that.
So, if you can think of a good use case for a function
that creates an array that you can't add anything to,
and that isn't initialised with anything, let me know.
Maybe you can think of a use case for that.
So, how would you initialise an array and give
the size but not any initial values.
You'd want to declare an array of nulls.
And you'll see how to do that later.
We haven't covered null handling yet.
So, when we get to that section, we'll cover how to create
arrays, you know, an array of size five
that's initialised to nulls.
There is a way to do it.
Now, one final thing before we leave arrays.
If you have an array of int and you want to call
a Java method, you can convert it to an IntArray.
And of course, this applies to all
of the primitive array types.
So, let's say you want to call our code in DummyClass,
but you have a general array.
I mean, you didn't know that you'd eventually
wanna call a Java method.
And so, you have just a general array.
You don't have one of these IntArrays.
Is there a way to convert?
Well yes, of course there is.
And if you guessed that the method is called
toIntArray, you're right.
So, you could do something like, DummyClass
got printNumbers and let's use,
Let's see.
One of our IntArrays up here.
We don't want to print 100 numbers.
Let's use our evenNumbers Array.
So, we'll say evenNumbers, dot toIntArray.
And that has now converted a general array of type int
to one of the special int Arrays.
And if we run, we'll see that we get
our array printed out from Java.
Zero, two, four, six, eight, et cetera.
So, if you have a regular Kotlin array
and you need to call Java method, is easy to convert
it to the equivalent primitive type array.
Of course, this raises the question of whether you can
do it the other way.
If you got a primitive type array class,
can you get a general array class?
So, if you have an intArray, and you convert that
to an array of int?
And of course, you can do that and I'm sure you can guess
what the function name is for that.
You just have to call the to,
Or maybe you can't.
This is a little different.
You have to call the to type array function, to typed array.
So, for example we could do something like
val convertedIntArray.
And this is going to be an Array of Int.
And we can say, myIntArray dot toTypedArray
and the compiler can probably infer the type of this.
So you probably don't even need this here.
It can infer the type.
So, that's all you have to do.
And of course, you can call this on any
of the special primitive type arrays.
All right.
That's all for arrays.
I'll see you in the next video.